- Hello, hello.
- Hello, how are you?
- I'm doing well.
So awesome to have you here on Talk Python
and talking academics.
I didn't tell you before we hit record,
but I spent a long time at universities
and I just love them.
They're such cool places
and it's gonna be really fun to get a look inside
how Python's being used there.
- Yeah, well, thank you so much for having me.
And yes, I too love universities.
It's kind of like all the coolest parts of humanity
just kind of intermixing in one place.
So yeah, I'd love to kind of peel back the curtain on how.
- Yeah, so we're gonna talk about how,
yeah, yeah, we're gonna talk about how you
and your colleagues use Python and data science
inside of your neurology research lab.
But before we dive into that,
let's just get a bit of background on yourself.
Who are you?
How did you get into Python?
All those things.
- Yeah, absolutely.
So I'm Keelen Cooper.
I'm a neuroscientist at the University of California,
Irvine, so Southern California,
about 15 minutes from the beach
and an hour from the mountains.
But I'm originally from the middle of nowhere, Indiana.
And I started playing with computers and code
when I was young, so like middle school-ish,
just ripping apart computers and seeing what was in them
and then trying to put them back together
and feeling bad when they didn't work right after.
And then the typical, you know,
tweaking the software when you don't like what it does
until you make it work.
And then probably my senior year of high school
is when I started teaching myself Python.
And it was because we had to do some,
for some government class, actually.
- Oh, wow, okay.
- And we had to learn,
we were learning about the stock market.
And every day you'd have to spend like 15 minutes
going to like some stock website
and like filling out your fake stocks.
And so I wrote a really small Python script
that would just pull the data from the website
and populate like an Excel spreadsheet.
And so every day the kids in the class
were just like going through and like spending 15, 20 minutes
by hand writing it down, and I would just sit there and-
- That's awesome.
- Wait.
(Irvine laughs)
And so that was kind of the first time I was like,
wow, this whole automation thing is pretty sweet.
And from there, Python just kind of,
I caught the bug pretty early.
Python was definitely the way to go.
- Yeah.
Was Python your first programming language?
- I mean, first programming language
was the Windows registry
and trying to undo all of the mistakes
that the operating system.
But it was my first-
- It's been a while.
Yeah, it's been a while since I've been
in the Windows registry, but good old Regedit.
- I switched to Linux pretty quick.
And yeah.
- Are you still on Linux?
- Mostly, my desktops are all Linux.
My servers are obviously all Linux.
I like Mac for a laptop just 'cause,
you know, Linux has this thing where you tinker with it.
And so then any small task you wanna do,
you end up like rewriting some deep script
in the operating system.
And like two hours later, you're like,
what was that small thing I was trying to do again?
- Yeah, exactly.
I got distracted.
I was rewriting something in there and off we go, yeah.
- Yeah, so Macs are nice 'cause you still have
all the same Unix-like properties that are great,
but you know, you pay a price for reliability,
but it's pretty, pretty-
- Yeah, you just sell a bit of your soul out,
but boy, is that UI nice.
And those little menu bar apps are handy.
You know, I was-
- It's a little thing.
- That's right.
I was been playing with running Ubuntu on my Mac M2 Pro,
which it runs great, but it's an ARM version of Mac,
or of Linux rather, well, both really.
But boy, is there a limited supply of applications
for an ARM Linux distribution?
- Linux.
- Let me tell you.
But like just download the Debian package.
Yeah, just download the Debian package.
You just install it, like wrong platform,
like again, over half.
But yeah, I think it will change as,
I think ARM's gonna start to take over Windows
a little bit as well.
And obviously the Mac world is basically transitioning.
So anyone who has a Mac, yeah.
- I think it's Qualcomm that just kind of started hinting
that they were gonna try and really heavily compete
with the M line of processors and have some pretty good specs.
- Yeah, it'll be good.
- I have an M3 and it's, it's pretty nice.
- It is, it is really nice.
And like I said, I'd like to run more stuff on it,
but you know, it's still kind of Intel or x86 stuff
for Linux and Windows.
So it's a little hard to work with that,
but still super fun.
That's a long way to say it's a very long time.
- Oh yes.
- I've been a reg at it.
(laughs)
It sounds like you as well being not naming Windows
too much.
- Yeah, yeah, no, I, yeah.
I'm so bad at Windows now.
Like when I'm helping people with Python or something else
and they show me their computer,
there's always that like 10 minute learning curve of,
okay, how do I do anything basic on this machine?
Or even like the keyboard shortcuts you get so accustomed
to when people don't have any of those little things
that you're just like, how do I?
- Honestly, that's it.
- How do I select everything?
- Yes, that is it.
Like I did professional software development on Windows
for a long, long time.
I even wrote a bunch of Windows apps.
It was great.
But going back and forth too quickly that or Linux,
like just the hotkeys, I just get broken.
Not just on Windows.
Also when I come back to Mac,
like I'm just completely out of sorts.
So yeah, it's fun.
All right, well, let's talk academics and Python
from a probably a OS, mostly agnostic perspective.
But yeah, just give us a sense of the kind of research
you do, what is your field?
What do you study?
Those kinds of things.
So people get a sense of like, you know.
- Why am I talking about this?
- Where you're coming from as you talk
about doing all these things.
- Yeah, so the core of my work is pure neuroscience.
So basic science, what we do mainly in the lab
is we take really tiny wires.
So they're like a fifth of the size of the human hair.
And now we're using something called silicon probes,
which are, they're manufactured the same way
that a computer chips are manufactured on silicon.
- Wow.
- It's using photolithography.
And so you have these really tiny--
- You get a higher density that way,
do you get like a bunch of little sensors
on one attachment point or something?
Okay.
- So we used to build these little drives.
I used to have one here, but I got rid of it.
Little drives by hand.
So you would just feed the wires in with the forceps.
And so you'd get maybe 64 or 128 at most,
depending on how much time you wanna sit there
and feed the wires in.
But now you can just get the manufactured.
You pay a lot more, but you get twice, three times the sites.
And the whole point is the more sites you have,
the more neurons you can actually record from in the brain.
- Yeah, you're not just saying this part of the brain lit up,
but you could have a much better picture, right?
- Yeah, yeah, so the constituent part of your brain
is the neuron.
And so of the millions and billions of neurons,
depending on the species you're recording from,
we can record maybe a few hundred of them,
but that's usually sufficient to actually,
in the specific region you study,
and I can talk about that more,
so to discern some sort of information from it.
So really the data type we really care about
is this tiny little electrical voltages
that tell you what different neurons
in the brain are talking about.
And so you put the wires in,
you record the conversations of a bunch of neurons,
and particularly we're interested in two brain regions
that are critical for memory, learning, and decision-making.
And this is the hippocampus,
which in humans is about the size of your pinky
and a few inches in from your ear,
and the prefrontal cortex,
which most people know about right behind your forehead,
important for learning, decision-making,
and all those sorts of things.
- Yeah.
- So that's the core of my work,
is I'm in the lab doing the actual data collection
and building equipment to actually do that.
But once you have all of that data,
and the data keeps growing like most other fields,
you gotta do a lot of pre-processing, which takes Python,
you gotta do a lot of post-processing,
which takes a lot of Python.
And also we do something called neural decoding.
So not only do we just like say descriptively
what are these neurons doing,
but we can go one step further and say,
what actual information are these cells representing?
So in the brain, we can kind of say,
this is kind of the fundamental kind of information transfer
and how information is manipulated in the brain
and how it ships information from the environment
into memory and how it uses that to make a decision.
All of those kinds of things we can use.
So we can do a lot of fancy modeling and statistics
and more recently deep learning and those sorts of things.
- Yeah, yeah.
We'll have to come back to deep learning later.
That'll be fun.
- Yeah.
(laughing)
- Well, given your background.
So for this hardware, do you write the software
that actually talks directly to the hardware,
or is there something that just records it
and you grab some sort of custom file format
and run with it?
- Yeah, more recently.
On the lab.
So as time goes on, there's more and more companies
that you can just buy off the shelf
kind of recording platforms,
mostly for the electrical engineering people.
It's kind of like an audio amplifier
'cause you're recording at millivolts in the brain.
So you have to amplify it, write it to,
if you're plugged in with a wire, write it to the computer.
So all that takes software in various forms.
And then we do a lot of animal research.
So the tasks that the animals do
are pretty much all automated.
But recently in the lab, we've kind of had this resurgence
of like developing kind of novel hardware
and a lot of automation of behavior.
So I've kind of rewritten most of our entire
behavioral stacks, which is a lot of just,
so microcontroller programming,
which not a lot of that's in Python.
A lot of that's just kind of like C++
and those sorts of things.
But we have cameras all over.
So I wrote this kind of like camera server
that streams all of the camera footage
from a bunch of automated boxes
to some like central server
that just collects all of that data.
So yeah, a lot of the behavioral stuff nowadays,
we're just building in-house
to collect all of the behavior data.
The EFS stuff is now,
especially because we're doing something
called wireless recording.
So instead of just having a wire plugged into the head,
it just writes it to like an SD card or Bluetooth.
That's just kind of all on chip.
- Yeah.
- And so it's just whatever the microcontroller language
of the chip needs.
- That's wild.
I think it's surprising how much software
and even hardware,
but definitely software is involved
for something that doesn't sound like a software discipline.
- Yeah.
- You wouldn't think of what you guys are doing
as inherently almost like a software team,
but there's a lot of software there.
- Absolutely.
And it's growing.
So it used to be like 10, 20 years ago,
more biology, I'd say,
like more wet lab stuff.
But 90% of what I do as kind of a neurobiologist
is really just engineering style things.
Like I'm more recently designing PCBs
and I'm in the shop a lot,
just like with saws and hammers and drills
and like actually physically building things.
And obviously a lot of code.
And the coding part is becoming bigger and bigger
to the point where in the field,
I always say that the neuroscience
is like about three decades behind astrophysics
'cause all the problems that like neuroscientists
like say we're facing now as a field,
they have like three decades prior
where in astrophysics, they're like,
well, or in neuroscience, we're like,
what do we do with all this data?
This is weak.
I mean, I'm collecting a hundred gigabytes an hour,
if not more.
What do we do?
- That is a lot.
- Yeah, but relative to like some of those big telescopes
that are collecting like almost petabyte scale.
- Yeah, yeah.
I would say both ends of physics,
like the very, very extreme ends of physics.
So astrophysics, the very large
and then particle physics, right?
At CERN as well, they've got insane amounts of data.
Yeah.
- And that's what we're starting to see,
I think in neuroscience too,
is that kind of division of like,
because the scale of data collection is so big,
you're starting to need not just a single lab, but teams.
So we have a few institutes now
that are just pumping out terabytes of data.
And so you start to see that division
between the neuroscientists who are really in the lab,
hands-on with actual neural tissue or the recording device,
and the neuroscientists who are just take the data
and analyze it and develop new models
and statistical models.
And also theory, there's always a dearth of theory
in neuroscience, but the computational modeling
is certainly getting a lot bigger
within the last few decades as well,
where people's entire job is just,
how do we model some of these things in code?
- Well, do you see,
you probably run into different research groups,
different teams that have different levels of sophistication
from a software side, and do you see like a productivity
or a quality difference jump out from like the kind of work
or the velocity of work that people are doing there?
- Absolutely.
And it makes me almost like a,
so a lot, I mean, it's a huge range.
There are like very sophisticated labs.
And usually those are the labs that have kind of
just a pure software person on the team
or people who are very inclined towards software,
all the way to, and it makes me so sad
when people are spending like weeks in a spreadsheet,
just manually doing things by hand.
- Yeah, I know.
- You could do this in five minutes in Python,
or like pandas, you could just load it and take it.
- And not only could you do it faster,
you could do it without any errors.
- Yeah, more of a lot.
- Right, none of those like, oh, I misread it
and I shifted off by a cell, or I typed in,
I missed something, right?
'Cause the code just reads what's there, yeah.
- Yeah, and so I think that a lot of,
a lot of like graduate programs are starting to
wake up to this fact that it's gonna be
almost impossible to do any science
without some degree of proficiency in coding.
And I think a lot of, say grad students and postdocs
and so on, when they actually sit down
and try and analyze their data,
whether there's just an Excel
or they need to write a little Python script,
that's kind of their first introduction is,
oh, I have this data, I need to do something with it.
I'm gonna Google exactly how do I read in this data
or how do I do a T-test in Python
or how do I plot something in Matplotlib?
And that's kind of the level that they start getting into
out of necessity.
But the sophistication and the speed,
because they're usually just teaching themselves,
that's most of academia, it's just,
you have a problem, spend a few days Googling
and reading books until you find it.
- And once it works, you can kind of just leave it.
- Exactly.
- You don't have to clean it up or anything, right?
Yeah, okay.
- Which results in a lot of, I mean,
the progress of science doesn't go away,
but the code is not robust.
And so that's why you see things,
especially in other fields of psychology
and such like replication crises
and people have done meta-analysis
of running the same software stack
on like 12 different data sets
and you get different results.
And so you start to kind of see
that shaky foundation starting to bleed into the,
like you said, the reliability.
- Starting to have consequences,
not just it's more work or something.
- Yeah, exactly.
- Yeah.
Maybe we could start a bit by just talking
about maybe the history,
you know, diving into this a little bit more,
just the history of programming in neuroscience.
Now, I wasn't in neuroscience in any way,
but I worked with a bunch of cognitive scientists
studying how people solve problems
and thought about things at a lab
for one of my first jobs.
And we studied all through eye tracking.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, like not the letter I,
not the iPhone, but actual eyes.
And it was fascinating.
It was tons of data.
It was really cool.
And there were, like you described,
a lot of people who would do sort of Excel stuff
and they would take the data and they process it.
And over time we just started to automate these things.
And their first thought was,
you're programming me out of a job.
I'm like, no, no, no.
This is the crappy part of your job.
Like you're supposed to analyze the results
and think about it and plan new stuff.
And now you can just focus on that.
Right, right.
And as the software got better,
you know, we just tackled bigger problems.
So, you know, maybe give us a bit of a history
of on your side.
- Yeah, yeah.
So I love the cognitive science part.
That's my more background is cognitive science.
I was my undergrad and grew up in science
in a cognitive science department
while also doing some wet lab neuroscience stuff.
So it's fun.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Did you start out with like MATLAB and that kind of stuff?
Is that where they told you you need to be?
- Exactly, yeah.
So a lot of, so neuroscience has certainly had,
at least our branch of neuroscience,
just because by the nature of recording voltages
and you need to write to a computer.
So there has been kind of a long history of,
for as long as there's been even like punch card computers,
people have kind of read in the data into the computer
and done, you know, their statistics on that rather
than something else.
I'm just, I'm actually recently writing
kind of a review article on kind of the history
of data science and neuroscience.
And I loved this paper.
It was from 1938 and they took an EEG spectrum.
And so EEG is just the continuous time series
of brain voltage.
So you're not in the brain recording.
And this is, I think, from humans.
And they took something called the Fourier transform,
which that might not be as up to speed with that
as you basically just take some oscillating signal
and you break it down into its constituent parts.
And most of you have seen it before
if you've ever seen like an audio spectrogram,
that's kind of the most notable visualization
where you can kind of see the high frequencies.
- Basically it pulls the frequencies out of the signal.
- Exactly.
- Yeah.
- But the way they did this, and this is 1938,
there's no computers.
So they actually had a mechanical device
where they would just take this EEG trace that was on tape
and they would feed it into this like mechanical machine.
And it would basically read kind of this black line
on the tape.
And so as it would crank the tape around this machine,
depending on kind of the frequency
that the line went up and down,
that would read out the Fourier transform.
So it was mechanical.
- Wow.
- So a lot of those cool devices back in the older days.
- Yeah, that's impressive.
- Now you can get that same thing with,
in MATLAB you just type FFT,
parenthesis, parenthesis, put your data in the middle
and you get the same thing in microseconds.
But neuroscience, at least my field,
has kind of always had this kind of serendipitous relationship
with computing generally, coding generally.
And a lot of the code, I think earlier on
was kind of was Fortran-ish
and then it moved towards MATLAB.
And MATLAB's kind of had its stake in the ground
for a long time,
just because that was the first kind of software
that could really do array manipulations on well.
And it was kind of a higher level
than some of the lower level programming.
So a lot of the older labs have,
their entire code base and stack
and analysis software in MATLAB.
And so it's only been within maybe five to six, seven years,
probably a bit longer, 10 years,
that you've really seen Python start to supplant MATLAB
as kind of the de facto programming language in labs,
just because of the cost
of trying to transfer everything over.
And despite the fact that MATLAB isn't open source
and it's extremely expensive,
most universities have licenses.
And so that kind of facilitates--
- It's prepaid.
- In a sense, yeah.
But it is very expensive.
- But it's still pretty expensive.
- Especially if you get those little toolboxes,
like wavelet decomposition toolbox,
2000 bucks instead of a pip install.
- Yeah.
And again, we do a lot of signal processing.
And so that's exactly the place you wanna be.
And like MATLAB usually controls,
because it has pretty good control over external hardware,
you can run your behavior, your task,
kind of in MATLAB codes.
You can kind of do everything in one language
as you would like to do in Python.
But it's starting to kind of go away.
And I think a lot of that is just because
the allure of Python, which has so many tools,
and because it's probably a lot easier to learn
for most people than MATLAB,
we're kind of starting to see that switch
now that there's kind of more to offer, I'd say,
a lot of scientists than MATLAB.
- Yeah, you said 10, 12 years ago.
Yeah, the difference in the external packages
on PyPI you can get,
and especially the ones for data science have just exploded.
The choices and the stuff that's out there,
it's pretty diverse and it's pretty crazy.
- The only other one that I think
is still in pretty strong competition with Python
from the perspective of,
we collaborate a lot with like mathematicians
and statisticians, and R is there.
Their usual favorite, just because statistics,
like all the best statistical packages
are still pretty much in R.
And so that's where a lot of people live.
ggplot's pretty good.
- Yeah, that's interesting.
It's really focused and it's really good at what it does.
And one of the things that I think's worth
just considering it,
if somebody comes, let's say,
brand new first year grad student comes into the lab
and you're like, all right,
what's your programming experience?
Like, well, programmed the clock on the VCR.
Like, okay, we're gonna have to start you somewhere
or something, right?
And you could teach them something really specific
like MATLAB or something along those lines.
But if they learn something like Julia,
not like Julia, like Python, not Julia,
maybe even not really R, but R is closer somewhat,
is they learn not just a skill for the lab,
but it's kind of almost any software job
is potentially within reach with a little bit of,
you know, learning about that area, right?
Like if you know Python, you say, I want a job,
there's a massive set of options out there.
If you say, I know MATLAB or even Julia,
it's like, okay, well, here's the few labs
and the few research areas and the real,
I just think it's something that-
- A lot of engineering firms.
- Yeah, yeah, I'm just thinking that like a lot of,
a lot of academic folks should consider what happens
if the student doesn't necessarily become a professor.
You know what I mean?
Which actually is a lot of the time, right?
Or a professional researcher of some sort.
And that's a really awesome skill to have
on top of your degree.
So I think that's just a big win for it.
Then I'm happy to see that.
- Yeah, and that literal situation just happened
where a statistician that we were collaborating
pretty closely with graduated, brilliant guy,
and got a job at Microsoft.
And so we were in a meeting after he was there
and they were like, what's some advice that you have
now that you've been, you know, in industry for a while?
He's like, stop using R, learn Python.
'Cause everyone here uses Python.
And it took me a few months to kind of switch
from the R worldview of, you know,
caret hyphen to equals.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
- To actually, to work and collaborate with everyone
'cause everyone's just using Python.
- Yeah, very interesting.
- From his perspective, and I'm sure it's not unique.
- No, I'm sure that it's not either.
I think, yeah, I just think it's not like a religious war.
It's not like, oh, I think Python is absolutely better
and you should just not use other stuff.
I just think it's preparing people for stuff beyond school.
It's a pretty interesting angle to take.
- Yeah, yeah.
And it's not like you can't learn other things.
I think it's really good to learn other things,
especially ones that are complimentary,
where R can be complimentary,
especially now that they have a lot of the like
subsystem packages.
So when I get R code, I usually just write like a sub process.
I did this recently,
just wrote like a sub process line to call the R script
'cause I was too lazy to rewrite it.
- Yeah, sure.
- But there's other, like, I don't know,
like Rust is probably a good one
to probably try and bring to,
or like lower level languages like C++.
- Yeah.
- If you need them for what you're doing.
- Yeah, and it sounds like you guys do
for talking to hardware and stuff like that.
- Yeah, yeah, occasionally.
Always there's a lot of things Python can't do.
- Yeah, for sure.
- It's really hard.
- Yeah, break out some MicroPython
when you gotta get your microcontrollers and stuff.
So another thing is, I don't know how it's received.
I know it took a while to kind of really catch on.
And I think the thing that just broke the final barriers
for open source being adopted,
at least in business, was the AI stuff
and the data science stuff.
People are like, "Oh, we can't use this open source stuff.
"We gotta have a SLA and some company we can sue
"if our code doesn't work right,"
or whatever, right, something crazy like that.
And they're like, "But you understand all the AI
"and all the data science.
"We have to use this open source stuff."
Like, all right, fine.
What's the open source story for you guys?
- Yeah, so I mean, academia is probably championed
open source for a really long time,
just because, I mean, open source back,
I mean, even when I first started,
was just if you read a paper
and someone has some new fancy analysis,
before it became a bigger push by funding agencies
to actually post it to GitHub or some repository,
I mean, you could just email people and be like,
"Hey, I saw your paper.
"I want that script,"
and they would just send you a MATLAB file.
And it would be just whatever they had written,
but it was in MATLAB,
and you'd have to kind of tear it apart yourself,
and there's little to no documentation.
You'd be lucky if there's comments,
and it's spaghetti code.
But you figured that out,
and you kind of work backwards and deconstruct it,
and eventually you kind of have their code.
So that kind of ethos of just scientists are really good
by and large of just sharing information
and helping people out.
If you have a question, just ask.
It's kind of always been there.
At least in our field,
it's not as competitive as some other ones
where you're just kind of like racing
to get the next project out.
It happens, but rarely.
But now a lot of funding agencies,
and just in general,
people are just excited about,
when you publish a paper,
you put a GitHub link in the bottom of the paper,
and then that links to the repository,
and maybe it's not been updated in a while,
but the code's there,
and you can just take it and grab it.
- For the reproducibility.
How about using other things?
Is there SciPy?
I know for astronomy, there's Astropy.
Is there a Neuropy?
- There's starting to be.
So it's really still more analysis-dependent
and pre-process-dependent.
So there's kind of this,
it's still the early days
where there's probably too many formats,
just because no one can agree on what's the best one.
So even a lot of the data formats
are written kind of in Python
to take whatever data you have
and reformat it to something shareable.
There's five or six of them floating around.
There's probably two that are still duking it out
to see which one will be the best,
and probably five years from now,
there's gonna be a better one.
So data formats, certainly there's kind of this,
there's a few that are neck and neck.
Analysis pipelines, a lot of those
are still done in-house,
but there's starting to be a lot more toolkits
and frameworks and packages.
There's some really good ones
that have more documentation written.
They're on the PyPy repositories,
so you can just pip install them and you have them.
The computational neuroscience people are great at this.
So all the neural simulation software,
that is all really well-documented, really well-written.
A lot of good example code and tutorials and so on.
So yeah, we're starting to see this more robust
ecosystem where you can just pull things.
It still just kind of varies.
There's probably still not one go-to place
other than the standard data science toolkits.
- Right, right.
- If you're using PyPy-- - The pandas and so on.
- Yeah, NumPy, Matplotlib, Pandas, Scikit-learn,
if you're doing deep learning, PyTorch or TensorFlow,
all of those still apply to any data science stack.
- Yeah, of course.
What's your day-to-day stack look like
if you're sitting down to do some analysis?
- Yeah, so like I said, the standard,
I have a VS Code, kind of like auto-complete,
where I just write import in,
and it just NumPy, Matplotlib, Pandas.
Then I usually delete Pandas
'cause unless I have a CSV file, I'm not using it.
So NumPy, Matplotlib, I can probably do 75%
of the things I wanna do.
Scikit-learn and SciPy, obviously,
if I'm doing any stats with those things,
those libraries are my go-to.
And then over the last few years,
I kind of just have my own,
just 'cause you catch yourself
writing the same functions over and over and over again.
So just started building my kind of internal framework
of just things I know I need.
So if I'm working with LFP data,
I have all my filters there.
If I have spike data, I have all my spikes there.
We do a lot of decoding,
so developing deep learning algorithms
to decode neural data.
All of those are kind of listed there.
So yeah, I started to understand
my friends that work in Silicon Valley
when they're like, "Oh, I'm on internal tools team,
"internal tools team," and they don't talk about it.
Like, their-- - Don't make anything?
Come on, man.
- Yeah, and then I started realizing,
dude, internal tools make the difference
between solving a problem in 10 minutes
or solving it in an hour,
where I can just sit down
and have everything automated to come up.
So yeah, the standard data science stack
I use pretty frequently.
Hardware stack, I mean, so VS Code,
I just recently switched to,
just 'cause everyone was talking about it
from like Sublime, or I usually just edit it in a terminal.
And I was like, "Oh, I'll try it out."
Everyone's talking about it.
It's one of the good things Microsoft has done.
It's pretty sweet.
- Yeah, it is pretty sweet.
- So that's pretty nice.
- Okay, and what do you do with the VS Code stuff?
Are you just writing straight Python scripts,
or are you doing VS Code on top of notebooks?
- Yeah, so Jupyter's great.
- It has that kind of text view
of a notebook type of thing, I think.
- Yeah, I used to use exclusively Python scripts,
so just the .py,
and then started seeing how great Jupyter was.
And so then you start doing everything in Jupyter,
and then you start to have all these convoluted notebooks,
and notebook V1 through 7.
So then you realize that you gotta find a balance
between, you know, notebooks are great for presentation
and for quickly testing,
but the sooner you can get it into a class structure
or a package or something.
- Sort of productized version of it,
you wanted to get it down into Python code
a lot of times, probably.
- Exactly, yeah, yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, you're like, "All right."
Like your internal tools you talked about.
You're like, "All right, this is the library
"you just call stuff, right?
"That just belongs more as a package and not a..."
- Exactly, yeah, yeah, yeah.
So the sooner you can kind of condense,
pull the code out of the notebook
and just leave the notebooks for presentation,
it's probably the best.
- Yeah. - It's a lot of pipelines.
So it's a lot of pre-processing pipelines.
So you don't want, you know,
50 cells of just moving data around.
- Preparing, yeah.
So you talked about having quite a bit of data,
some of that being image-based.
Sounds like a lot of work.
Do you have like a big compute cluster?
Do you just have like an ultra, an M3 ultra or whatever?
That's not even how you use it, it's M2s.
But do you have just a big machine
or do you guys do cloud stuff?
What's compute look like?
- Yeah, so it depends on what I'm doing, what I need.
Most things, let's be honest,
I could probably just use Macbook or I have my own kind of,
my desktop computer is really a super micro server.
It just runs Linux.
But then, you know, like if we're doing deep learning,
you need GPUs.
And so we have a nice set of GPUs we can pull.
- Yeah, do you do your own training on LLMs
and other deep learning things?
Yeah.
- The only LLM training I do is just for fun.
But yeah, so all the deep learning stuff we have to train
kind of in-house on our particular data.
So that's, you know, all GPUs for that.
A lot of the statistics we do are like permutations.
So you need to kind of like parallelize them out into CPUs.
So then I'll pull like a CPU cluster we have if I need it.
But also I realize too.
- Sorry, did you see Irvine have like a big compute resource?
- There were a few.
Yeah, they have a campus wide one that you can get on.
And there's a few independent ones that I have access to.
So GPU is kind of in a different place than CPUs are.
So I can just kind of pick and choose.
And then I have a few servers in the lab
that I've just kind of put together
that all my camera stuff, all my behavior,
I kind of wrote it so it's cloud-based.
So I can kind of just pull up my phone
and look at the videos of what animals are doing and stuff.
All that runs on just a server in the lab.
So yeah, the compute is there when you need it.
And I think as I've matured, I've kind of learned
when to use what compute when and when it's worth
taking the extra time to use it when you don't need to.
And also when a lot of the times you don't even need it.
So I know a lot of people when I see their code
and they complain that it takes like an hour to run.
I mean, just using multiprocessing in Python
that in and of itself is enough
to not need to use a cluster.
- Right.
- Or using a single thread for their analysis.
- Right, for sure.
Or just a bad programming patterns, design patterns.
Like you're looping over the thing in the pandas data frame
instead of doing vector operations in the pandas data frame
like that kind of stuff, right?
- A hundred percent, yeah.
I mean, that was one of the first things
that I usually teach.
I have this little example script
that shows like, why is it better to preallocate array
rather than to just append to the bottom?
- Yeah.
- And it's like these things
that we kind of take for granted now,
but it's not intuitive unless you actually--
- No, you learn it the hard way,
but it sticks in your mind once you learn it.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, so how do you go about--
- I think that's the issue.
It's like people just take it for granted.
- Yeah, for sure.
Like, why didn't you know that?
How do you onboard new people?
If you get new grad students
or people contribute, other contributors?
- Yeah, it just kind of depends on the lab.
Every lab kind of has their own structure
of just kind of this hierarchy of expertise
where like I started as an undergrad
and I just volunteered in a lab at a different university
and just volunteered my time,
eventually could get paid.
Just wanted to spend time in the lab and you could
all the way to grad students
who are there to get a PhD
and have more kind of autonomy over their projects.
A postdoc who has a PhD
and five to eight years of experience
and so can pretty work well.
Then there's like staff scientists
or even a lot of labs now are hiring just pure engineers
or pure software people.
- Okay.
- Who need to, because there's such a need for that.
And so, yeah, it really just depends
on the lab specific situation
and what their focus is on
and what they need and those sorts of things.
- Cool, I guess if you have a good NSF grant
and you got some extra money,
it might be money well spent to hire
some student who has good programming skills, right?
- Absolutely, yeah.
- Yeah.
One sec.
All right, let's see.
You talked about the video stuff
that you're doing in the streaming video.
Like, do you actually do analysis on that?
Or is it just for you to go back and look at?
- Oh yeah, yeah.
We do analysis on that.
There's actually a pretty cool deep learning package out now
we didn't write it, another lab did
where you just give it the video frame
and it can automatically segment kind of,
if it's an animal, right?
So like where their paws are
or where their like nose is looking.
In some cases people have like,
you're talking about eye tracking.
They do eye tracking in like mice now.
- They do eye tracking on mice?
That was hard on humans in the '90s.
- Yeah, there's a lot of VR.
So they put kind of mice in this like VR system.
- Oh wow.
- And they can like see where their little mouse pupil
is looking on like the screen.
- Yeah, and do they show them different scenarios
and they can detect that and they react to it?
- Oh, absolutely, yeah.
- Yeah, wow, okay.
- Yeah.
- Incredible.
- So yeah, and a lot of stuff,
at least in our field, the Nobel Prize was awarded for,
you stick some electrodes in the hippocampus
or your brain that's important for learning and memory.
Then you have the animal kind of run around some environment
and then you take some video data
kind of where they were running the environment.
And if you were only looking at the brain data,
you can predict to like 90 some percent accuracy,
the location of the animal.
So you can show this kind of this correspondence
that inside the brain is a map of kind of the environment.
Our stuff, we're taking that a little one step further
that says this map is not just for space,
it's for non-spatial and other things too.
That there's this kind of network of information
in the brain that the animal can kind of like
navigate through, even if they're just standing still,
but thinking about some sort of problem.
But we use video data to validate what the animal's doing
or check what kind of tasks they're doing
and so on and so forth.
- Wow.
- So yeah, a lot of multimodal heterogeneous data
that each needs its own funky pre-processing
and depending on the task at hand,
you're writing something new to ask that question.
- Amazing.
So is that OpenCV?
- My stuff is, yeah.
Yeah, my stuff is OpenCV.
Streamed over sockets and some Django webpage.
It's fun, it's cool to build.
- Yeah, that sounds really cool.
- Yeah, absolutely.
- So what kind of questions are you answering
with the video?
- Yeah.
- Or is it just to correlate back with the time series
of what you're measuring in the brain?
- Yeah, so one thing I'm looking at is,
so like I said, the Nobel Prize was for the spatial map.
We're doing this non-spatial stuff.
And so we kind of do both in the lab
where we have an animal kind of run around
and then we have an animal just kind of sit still
and do some sort of mental task.
In our case, they have to memorize a sequence of odors
and if the sequence gets shuffled,
they make a different choice.
And so we're basically showing
how does the brain work for the spatial part
versus the non-spatial part?
What's similar about these two things?
What's different about these things?
And we show that one of our recent papers was that
the brain uses a lot of the similar mechanisms
to navigate space as it does to navigate
this kind of non-spatial odor task.
- Oh, wow.
- But we also showed that there's this mechanism
that the brain uses to take kind of discrete memories
and link them together into some kind of miracle.
Best case being like this talk,
we've been talking back and forth for 30 some minutes now
and inside there's kind of chunks of the conversation.
So if tomorrow someone was to ask you,
what did you and that neuroscience guy talk about
on your podcast?
You would kind of rattle off this story of,
oh, we talked about history of Python
and this and this and this, right?
This, this and this are each kind of discrete memories
that in your brain you kind of lock together.
- Right, okay.
- So you could use them, make decisions about them
and so on and so forth.
- Think about it as a whole, not just the little ideas,
every little idea of it,
like just the big concept of it, right?
- Exactly, yeah.
And it's a fundamental thing that the brain does.
Like people say humans are storytellers
and your life is kind of the sequence of events of stories.
And so you use that every single day
and across a bunch of diseases,
that's one of the first things to actually be impaired,
whether it's addiction or schizophrenia or Alzheimer's,
that kind of ability to link things in time
and link them well and make decisions about them
starts to get impaired.
- Yeah, and that's not great when that happens,
but that is what happens, right?
- Absolutely, yeah.
- Yeah.
So I guess what are some of the,
what are some of the software engineering practices,
for lack of a better word,
that you would recommend that maybe other grad students,
professors who are feeling like they're not,
they don't have their software game fully together,
pay attention to it.
And maybe what should they ignore, right?
Like, should they pay attention to like source control
and get up?
Should they have unit tests or, you know,
what should they pay attention to?
- First off, no one writes tests.
That is just, only the very few, very well put together,
and usually people who just came from industry
write tests, which is an issue.
But yeah, first off, just learn Python.
And I've said that hundreds of times,
and I'm preaching to the choir in this audience.
- You are, for sure.
- Learn Python.
Honestly, there's not much better you could learn now.
And two, it's, you know,
it's quintessential automation stuff.
So it's really just think about the things
that you're doing, like the spreadsheets,
or, you know, the simple things.
And really just ask yourself, you know,
if you find yourself doing any repetitive tasks,
that's a software problem.
And those are the things to kind of look at first.
And so you have your text editor in one window,
Google in the other, and stack overflow
your way to learning.
And so the way people, I think,
really do kind of teach themselves Python,
it is probably the best way to learn.
But nevertheless, I think there is a real need for,
and again, we're starting to see more of it,
just formal education, even if it's just a course.
Our program is really great that they started
to teach a Python course,
just 'cause the students requested it,
because they knew how important it was.
- So you've got Python for neuroscience?
- Exactly, yeah.
- Okay, yeah.
- That's what it is.
I mean, you just work your way through if statements
for loops, you know, data types.
- But you probably also, I'm just guessing,
you get a chance to work with some of these
external libraries that are relevant
to studies they're doing, right?
Rather than, here's an example of stock market data.
You're like, great, not a trader.
I don't wanna be a programmer, why am I here, you know?
- Yeah, it's really relevant.
I think it's just kinda seeing like,
oh yeah, I would do that this way,
but this is so much easier if I use Python,
and I can use it in Python,
and just seeing that, oh, it's not as bad as,
the mountain looks a lot higher
when you're at the base than the summit, so.
- It does.
- Just kinda, you know, seeing it done once
is usually enough to kinda tell people
it's not as bad as you originally think.
- Yeah, I feel like maybe I saw it this way.
I certainly know a lot of other people see it this way.
I mean, when I was younger,
but a lot of people see it this way as well,
is that like, you gotta be crazy smart to do programming.
It's really challenging.
It's, you know, kind of one of those things
that only a few people can do,
and then you get into it and you're like,
oh, it's not a few really huge steps
and things you've gotta solve.
It's like a thousand small steps.
And each one of the little small steps,
you're like, that was actually easy.
That's no big deal.
What's the next step?
And you get to the end, you're like,
where was the big step?
Where was it really hard, right?
- Yeah, absolutely.
- Yeah, do you have some experience
where people in the department or people that worked with you
are like, ah, I'm not a programmer.
I don't wanna do this stuff.
Then they kinda got into it and really found out
that programming was something they really liked.
Any converts out there?
- Yeah, I would say so.
Yeah, I think so.
I think it's, I mean,
I think there's kinda two kinds of people.
There's people who program just because,
what is it, the programming is an art book or whatever.
They love it just for the sake of loving, right?
And I'm probably closer to those kinds of people, right?
I just think it's the coolest thing academically.
But then there's the people who just kinda see it
as it's a tool like anything else.
And so you could be an expert in a drill
or you could just know to pick up a drill.
And I think that's kind of the majority of people
is that it's just another tool in their toolkit to,
especially for a scientist,
just to answer the question that you're trying to answer.
And I would even flip the reverse
where there's been some times where I've
maybe even used Python too much
in the sense that I made a problem more,
'cause it's like the automation dilemma, right?
It's like, do I spend an hour automating this
when I could do it in 10 minutes?
- You gotta do it a lot of times
and all of a sudden the hour's worth it.
But if it turns out you don't.
- It's like, I might need this a year from now,
so I might as well just write the script,
whereas I could just do it in Excel or something.
- That's pretty standard,
standard problems we all run into in programming.
It's like, go write some code, do that.
Or I could just be done with it for sure.
All right, I think we've got time for a couple more topics.
One thing that I think might be fun to talk about
is publishing papers, right?
Obviously, if you're in academics,
especially in labs, you gotta publish papers.
Do you use notebooks and stuff like that for your papers
or is that just kind of separate?
- Yeah, like I said, notebooks are great for presentation.
So yeah, I use notebooks kind of for development
just because you can quickly run code
and go back up and move things around.
And so I kind of like that ability to kind of just,
a stream of consciousness, write code
until you kind of see how it's kind of working,
the prototype, and then refactor out
into an actual .py document or a package or something.
So that's kind of been my workflow
and it works pretty well.
But then when you actually have the code
and it works and it's robust,
you actually wanna put, there's a lot of figures,
that's usually the main thing.
So you kind of put all of that,
here's the data, here's the pre-processing,
here's the figure one, here's figure two, figure three,
in the notebook just so it's reproducible
and other people can download it
and rerun your code and that sort of thing.
So I think that's slowly becoming
kind of the standard approach
for those labs that use Python
and they share their code openly.
That's kind of how they do it.
- Anything like executable books
or any of those things that kind of produce
printable output out of the notebooks?
Like publish a little output out of the notebooks?
- Yeah, so not a lot, but
there's one of the journals, it's called eLife,
it's kind of,
it's trying to push the boundaries
of what it means to publish a scientific paper.
And so they kind of have,
because most papers are really just on the web nowadays,
the journals aren't really physical journals
as much anymore.
They kind of have papers as executable code
where you can plot the figure in the browser
and kind of run through the notebook.
As an experiment, it's pretty cool
to kind of see these new alternative ways
to still convey the same findings,
but you can play with it, you can kind of see how it goes.
So the methods are kind of implicit in the output.
- What's the name of the journal?
- That's eLife, yeah.
- eLife, okay, cool.
Yeah, you probably, I suppose,
need some way to capture the data output
'cause you might not have access to the compute
to recompute it.
Somehow it's gotta sort of be a static version,
but that sounds really cool.
- Yeah, and especially for like,
most recently, some of our like trained models,
it's becoming more important to just share the weights
and share those sorts of things too.
You can't just share the code to train the thing
if people don't have the compute
to actually train them themselves.
So it's kind of growing to not just sharing your data,
not just sharing your code,
but you need to share like the key derivatives
of the pre-processing and those sorts of things.
- Yeah.
- Or even just sharing the version numbers
'cause there's been the psychology or fMRI literature,
there's like a bug in some version
that made a lot of the results null.
So, one person could use version 3.7 of a package,
but that had a bug, but people don't know that.
- Right, so they claim it's not reproducible,
but it's really just not the same.
- Algorithms.
- Yeah, yeah.
Or like across languages,
like if you rerun the same analysis
in MATLAB versus Python versus R,
especially complex ones,
there's a lot of little design decisions under the hood
that might tweak exactly how that regression fits
or exactly how that,
if you're statistically sampling,
how the sampling works under the hood of those.
- Sure.
Awesome, are you familiar
with the Journal of Open Source Software?
- Yeah, yeah.
- I had the books on there.
Yeah, I had them on quite a while ago.
I think they're trying to solve an interesting problem of,
if you take the time to create a really nice package
for your area,
you might have not taken your time writing the paper
and so you wouldn't get credit
'cause you don't have as many papers to publish.
So, they let you publish your open source work there,
which I think is pretty cool.
- Yeah, we--
- What do you think about that?
- Yeah, we kind of had that same problem.
One of the, I run a nonprofit called Continual AI.
It does artificial intelligence and outreach and research
and we have conferences and all sorts of events.
But one of the main things we've done
is we built a deep learning library
on top of PyTorch called Avalanche.
And so, we had a really great community
of mostly volunteers who just saw the need in the field
and put it together.
But then again, it's like a lot of us are academics,
how do you present this?
And so, you write wrapper papers
around kind of the framework.
So, that's kind of been the de facto way of like,
it's not really a paper,
but you still need to like, share it
and get credit for it and put your name on it.
So, yeah, it's certainly an issue.
I'm starting to see it not even just with software,
but even with hardware,
because hardware is becoming more open source in our field.
So, you just kind of write like a paper
about the hardware solution to some problem.
- That's cool.
- It's better than a patent.
- Yeah, it's definitely better than a patent.
Patents, while they serve a purpose, are pretty evil.
Let's wrap things up with maybe just,
you know, you mentioned Continual AI.
Tell people a bit about that.
- Yeah, so it's the largest non-profit
for continual learning.
Continual learning in a nutshell is,
say I have a neural network
and I train my neural network to classify cats.
And I classify cats to 90% accuracy.
And we're like, yeah, this is why neural networks are great.
I take that same trained neural network on cats
and I train it on, say, dogs.
It does really well, 90% accuracy on dogs.
We're really excited why neural networks are so great.
But the issue is if I take that, again, the same network,
I just trained it on dogs, I'd previously trained it on cats.
I try and test it on cats again,
it's gonna forget pretty much everything
it learned about cats.
And this is an old, old problem,
back in like, you know, the good old days
when neural networks were connectionist models
and it was computer scientists,
it was the cognitive scientists.
They noticed--
- It's like over-training or something like that, right?
Kind of over-fitting to the dog.
- They're all related, yeah, it's very similar.
Catastrophic forgetting,
they call it the sequential learning problem,
which is why I'm really interested in it
'cause I'm really interested in continual learning
and sequential memory.
Or in neuroscience,
it's called the stability plasticity problem.
So when do you learn, when do you remember?
And so over the last,
since we started the organization in 2018,
the field has kind of exploded
just because there's such a need for overcoming this
across a lot of use cases.
So like a lot of times you could only see the data once.
So the way you solve the problem generally
is you just shuffle in cats and dogs
into the same dataset and retrain your model.
But now the neural networks
are getting bigger and bigger and bigger,
retraining is getting costlier and costlier.
You can't just have,
can't train a network on petabytes
every time you wanna update it.
That's even if you have access to the data
and the storage to save it and so on and so forth.
So clever ways to solve the problem.
So we're kind of around that.
We have neuroscientists, we have computer scientists,
AI researchers across academia, industry,
all that are just a bunch of people
really interested in this problem.
They just come together and share papers, share ideas.
We just had a conference.
We sponsor a lot of competitions
for people to kind of put forward an idea
to some problem that we kind of put out every year.
So it's been really, really exciting
to kind of see the community grow over the years
and all the tools and fun things
that's kind of come out of that.
- Well, it's definitely a hot topic right now.
You know, I know the cognitive scientists
and neuroscientists studied neural networks and stuff.
And it was kind of like, well, maybe this model stuff.
And then now we're in the time of LLMs
and the world has gone crazy.
- Absolutely.
- So I guess I said we would close out with a continual AI,
but let me just ask, you know,
what are your thoughts on LLMs, where this stuff's going?
I mean, we all have exposure to it in different ways,
but you've got this understanding
of what they're trying to model it on quite a bit.
So, you know, what do you guys in your space think of it?
- So, and I was, so the first lab I joined
was a, well, the first real lab I joined
was a neuroscience lab where we were sticking wires
in brains and actually doing real neuroscience.
But I also started kind of simultaneously working
with a cognitive scientist where we were working
on the original word to Vec.
So this is in my mind, like the grandfather of the LLM.
So this is the model that like overnight
took Google Translate from being meh to pretty good.
And it's just really at the heart of it,
just an auto encoder.
But we were really excited then doing kind
of semantic modeling of just how much further
kind of deep learning could take language modeling.
And then we were actually using it
to study catastrophic forgetting.
So does word to Vec catastrophically forget?
And the punchline is it does.
And that kind of got me jumped into really excited
about continual learning and so on.
So I saw kind of that trajectory then
and then kind of stepped out of it for a few years
and dug more deep into pure neuroscience
and artificial intelligence from other angles.
But I'd always been just so fascinated by this idea
of like, say you take an AI and it could read every book
or it could read the internet.
Like, what would you be able to get?
And that was kind of, in my mind, like, well,
seeing word to Vec try and do the same thing
and training it on my laptop,
like, well, you know, it's gonna take a minute
till we get there.
And I underestimated that drastically.
- It was like almost no progress, almost no progress.
Wow, what just happened, right?
- Yeah, absolutely.
And I think it's a testament to statistical learning
more than anything, which is just how much information
can you just soak up and put together in a fancy new way
and regurgitate back.
I think the next big leap is going to be
adding more cognition to that progress.
So adding, when an agent has a goal,
when an agent kind of has to break down a series of steps
to get to that goal,
those kinds of things we don't see as much of.
And that will kind of be the next big push, I think,
that'll kind of take all the cool things
that LLMs can do now and kind of blow everyone away.
If you could take the internet
and put it on a seven gigabyte file,
what can that get you?
But what if you could take the internet,
put it on a seven gigabyte file,
but actually have some sort of logic and direction
and the agent itself can actually navigate
through its own thoughts?
That's gonna take us, I think,
right to the borderline of...
- Terminator?
- Not Terminator.
- I'm just kidding.
- It won't be Terminator.
No, it won't be Terminator.
It'll be a really an intelligence system.
- Yeah, it's gonna be super interesting.
You know, you've got all this prompt engineering
and these clever ways to kind of get the current LLMs
in the right mindset, which is probably a personification.
But you can tell it things like,
here, I want you to tell me how to do this.
And it'll come up with some answer.
You can say, I want you to think step by step.
And then all of a sudden
you get a real different type of answer
where it pulls out the pieces
and it thinks about how it does it.
And I think it's gonna be interesting.
It's kind of like, it feels like kind of that kind of stuff,
but it just, it already knows how to think.
You don't have to give it little weird clues
like you're an expert in this
and you're really good at it.
Now I want to ask you a question about, oh, I'm good at it.
Okay, I'll answer better.
- Yeah, I don't know.
My favorite definition of AI
is it's whatever computers can't do yet.
- Yeah.
- Because like, you know, 30 years ago,
if we had this conversation, it'd be like,
so what do you think of deep blue?
Do you think deep blue,
the AI that has a problem chest,
can think and is it gonna take all our jobs?
Or it's gonna be, what can Watson do?
Is it gonna think and take all our jobs?
And you know, that was solved with tree search,
which undergraduates in their second year CS class
are learning.
It's just a standard, it's search.
People don't even think of searches.
- What if we just loaded every possible outcome
into the chest thing and the steps
and we just try to take, traverse each step
and see where it takes us, right?
- Exactly.
So, I mean, there's always gonna be a room to grow,
but from a cognitive science perspective,
I think something far more interesting rather,
you know, I think it's cool to see
what computers can actually do.
And I think they can do a hell of a lot more,
but I think it's more interesting to kind of
ask the more philosophical question
of what does that actually mean for us?
'Cause every step of the way,
when we develop something new in artificial intelligence,
it tells us something a lot deeper
about our own intelligence too.
- Yeah.
- Where back in the 50s and 60s,
they thought the chest meant intelligence.
And so now we're kind of seeing with LLMs,
if someone just reads a bunch of books
and can memorize a bunch of books,
does that mean they're intelligent?
'Cause that's effectively what an LLM can do.
- Yeah.
- It can read a bunch of books.
- It comes across as intelligent, right?
It comes across that way to people like,
"Oh, you have all the answers,"
but it doesn't mean you're good
at problem solving necessarily.
- Exactly.
And so I think we're kind of peeling at this onion
and we're kind of segmenting intelligence
into its different categories
to really kind of break it apart
just from this vague word of intelligence
into actually what are the parts
that make something intelligent?
What does it really mean?
And what are still the things that we thought were hard
and are really easy,
or the things that we thought were easy and really hard?
'Cause any LLM you have now can't chew gum
and walk to the store and buy you something to eat
and then play you in chess.
And so the general and general AI isn't just there
to make it sound grander.
It's there because that's actually something
that makes humans very, very unique
is that I can have this conversation with you,
write code, prepare an omelet, walk a dog,
and do all of these things all at once.
And I started as a baby.
- Yeah.
And have feelings and thoughts
and introspection about it and all that.
- Yeah, hopes, dreams, like ketchup and not tomatoes
and all sorts of other things.
- Yeah.
Yeah, super interesting.
So are you pretty positive on where stuff's going?
- Oh yeah, absolutely.
I think I'm less concerned about the AI itself
and I'm more concerned about just how we react to it.
And if we act intelligent, we react well.
We went through the industrial revolution.
We've went through the steel age.
We're starting to go through the cognitive revolution
or whatever people are gonna call this 100 years ago.
I think by and large, people are gonna be okay.
I think we just need to have good policies,
make sure that people do it responsibly,
people do it well.
And that's gonna be the hard part
is just how do we manage the transition well?
How do we take a whole labor force
whose jobs will be gone?
Like there's no economic incentive to keep their jobs
and retrain them in a really smart and sensible way
so people's livelihoods don't just go away
to maximize the dollar.
Those are kind of problems that are gonna need good policy
and clever solutions and a lot of research
to actually sit down and handle well.
But AI isn't gonna go anywhere
just like computers haven't went anywhere.
- Yeah.
- But it's not a terminator that we should worry about.
- No, absolutely.
It's certainly not.
I was joking.
We should worry about disinformation.
(both laughing)
And politics and news.
- I mean, and I think, I don't know.
I mean, I think people get so hung up on all the negatives
that we kind of forget
like we're developing these tools for a reason.
Scientists are spending so much time
and we're excited about them for a reason.
One being that I used to work on proteins
trying to find the structure of proteins.
And that was one protein a year.
It would take one year to find the structure of protein.
And now I can run this.
I took the same sequence that we found
and ran it through AlphaFold
which is DeepMind's protein folding software.
They could do it in five minutes.
- Amazing.
- I mean, those are the things that'll really like
catalyze science and technology and healthcare
and actually solve the problems we wanna solve.
So that's where I think--
- Find new energy sources.
I think I heard even some AI stuff
coming up with some new battery chemistry potentially.
- Everything.
- Yeah.
- How do you appropriately kind of harness
like a fusion ring and like a topomag reactor
or something like that.
Everything, even to how do you route a PCB
like millions of traces effectively.
So it's a tool for the mind
and it's not gonna put our minds out of work.
Like you said a long time ago
when you were in your eye tracking lab.
- Yeah, exactly.
I got a different view of that thing.
Yeah, exactly.
The same reason that none of us wanna sit around
and churn butter and go till the fields
and walk to work.
- I don't dislike my clothes washer, not at all.
Yeah, awesome.
All right, well, thanks for giving us a look
inside your lab, inside your research and the field
and then just sharing what you brought it up to.
It's been great.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Thanks for having me.
Yeah, it's been really great to,
at least for the years that I've been in research
seeing how pivotal Python has been.
And I think that's one of the big things
that probably goes unnoticed by a lot of developers
when they're actually writing their code
to solve whatever problem they're solving
is that, I mean, someone who's wrote the NumPy library
or the scikit-learn library or Jupyter notebooks
has actively played a part in curing diseases
and making people's lives better.
And those stories usually don't kind of come
to the forefront.
- Yeah, it's not a direct line, right?
But the research was done and facilitated
by these open source tools and then discoveries were made.
- But like we said, that's the difference
between people getting cured in 10 years
or getting cured in a year.
And that's thousands of lives.
And so you might not think about it
when you're sitting behind your desk,
making something usable.
But for every day, a PhD student doesn't have
to like pull their hair out and debug some software
when it's well-written and it works well,
that's a day that they can find something new.
- That's awesome, yeah.
Very inspiring.
Let's leave it there, Keelen.
Thank you for being on the show.
Yeah, it's been great to talk to you.
Thanks for coming.
Yeah, thanks for coming.